the team have located a female AI and
has something they want to attach radio
collars to track their movements and
better understand how far they range
through these forests but first they
must sedate them with a dart that's an I
do is wait for it to come down low
enough to get that clean shot mean how
you get a clean shot in this
after two hours of traipsing through the
treacherous forest the eye is remain at
large
well here is the aye-aye that was
tranquilised last night they finally got
her about half an hour after we left I
think it was probably because we were
disturbing her apparently as soon as we
gone she came down the tree and she was
tranquilised and as you can see she's
pretty well sedated now which is
fortunate for me because she has certain
adaptations that I wouldn't like to be
deployed you can see there her teeth the
teeth are very unusual for a primate in
fact unique because they carry on
growing so she's much more like a rodent
in that respect and that's so she can
gnaw into wood see I eyes have filled a
unique niche on Madagascar it's a niche
that's filled by woodpeckers and many
other areas of the world what she does
is she feeds on grubs and bugs inside
treats and to do that she has several
unique adaptations of which the teeth
the one the most startling is this
central finger here it's bizarre it's
got a ball and socket joint press Start
so it has complete 360 degree movement
it feels to me almost if it's broken but
it isn't it's just you can move it
around in any direction and she uses
that finger initially to tap on the
trunk of the tree and then listening to
the echo and that's happened with these
huge ears she can detect where the grubs
are and then she knows through the wood
with those rodent-like teeth and then
uses this finger again to reach inside
the hole and get the bugs out so the
question is why how could an animal be
so precisely adapted to a particular
lifestyle she's waking up now and the
answer is natural selection see what
must have happened is way back when the
ancestors of the lemurs delivery forms
arrived in Madagascar there must have
been a mutation
that lengthened the middle finger ever
so slightly like one of those lemurs and
that must have given it an advantage
that must have allowed it perhaps to
reach into little holes and search for
grubs there's some reason why that
lengthened middle finger meant that that
gene was more likely to be passed to the
next generation and then down to the
next generation so that that landscape
of possibilities is narrowed it's
narrowed because that gene persists and
it's persisted now for at least 40
million years because this species has
been on one branch of the Tree of Life
now for over 40 million years and so
over those years that middle finger has
got more and more specialized